
White matter hyperintensities and imaging patterns of brain ageing in the general
population.

White matter hyperintensities are associated with increased risk of dementia and 
cognitive decline. The current study investigates the relationship between white 
matter hyperintensities burden and patterns of brain atrophy associated with
brain ageing and Alzheimer's disease in a large populatison-based sample (n =
2367) encompassing a wide age range (20-90 years), from the Study of Health in
Pomerania. We quantified white matter hyperintensities using automated
segmentation and summarized atrophy patterns using machine learning methods
resulting in two indices: the SPARE-BA index (capturing age-related brain
atrophy), and the SPARE-AD index (previously developed to capture patterns of
atrophy found in patients with Alzheimer's disease). A characteristic pattern of 
age-related accumulation of white matter hyperintensities in both periventricular
and deep white matter areas was found. Individuals with high white matter
hyperintensities burden showed significantly (P < 0.0001) lower SPARE-BA and
higher SPARE-AD values compared to those with low white matter hyperintensities
burden, indicating that the former had more patterns of atrophy in brain regions 
typically affected by ageing and Alzheimer's disease dementia. To investigate a
possibly causal role of white matter hyperintensities, structural equation
modelling was used to quantify the effect of Framingham cardiovascular disease
risk score and white matter hyperintensities burden on SPARE-BA, revealing a
statistically significant (P < 0.0001) causal relationship between them.
Structural equation modelling showed that the age effect on SPARE-BA was mediated
by white matter hyperintensities and cardiovascular risk score each explaining
10.4% and 21.6% of the variance, respectively. The direct age effect explained
70.2% of the SPARE-BA variance. Only white matter hyperintensities significantly 
mediated the age effect on SPARE-AD explaining 32.8% of the variance. The direct 
age effect explained 66.0% of the SPARE-AD variance. Multivariable regression
showed significant relationship between white matter hyperintensities volume and 
hypertension (P = 0.001), diabetes mellitus (P = 0.023), smoking (P = 0.002) and 
education level (P = 0.003). The only significant association with cognitive
tests was with the immediate recall of the California verbal and learning memory 
test. No significant association was present with the APOE genotype. These
results support the hypothesis that white matter hyperintensities contribute to
patterns of brain atrophy found in beyond-normal brain ageing in the general
population. White matter hyperintensities also contribute to brain atrophy
patterns in regions related to Alzheimer's disease dementia, in agreement with
their known additive role to the likelihood of dementia. Preventive strategies
reducing the odds to develop cardiovascular disease and white matter
hyperintensities could decrease the incidence or delay the onset of dementia.

