
DL-ADR: a novel deep learning model for classifying genomic variants into adverse
drug reactions.

BACKGROUND: Genomic variations are associated with the metabolism and the
occurrence of adverse reactions of many therapeutic agents. The polymorphisms on 
over 2000 locations of cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP) due to many factors such as 
ethnicity, mutations, and inheritance attribute to the diversity of response and 
side effects of various drugs. The associations of the single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), the internal pharmacokinetic patterns and the vulnerability
of specific adverse reactions become one of the research interests of
pharmacogenomics. The conventional genomewide association studies (GWAS) mainly
focuses on the relation of single or multiple SNPs to a specific risk factors
which are a one-to-many relation. However, there are no robust methods to
establish a many-to-many network which can combine the direct and indirect
associations between multiple SNPs and a serial of events (e.g. adverse
reactions, metabolic patterns, prognostic factors etc.). In this paper, we
present a novel deep learning model based on generative stochastic networks and
hidden Markov chain to classify the observed samples with SNPs on five loci of
two genes (CYP2D6 and CYP1A2) respectively to the vulnerable population of 14
types of adverse reactions.
METHODS: A supervised deep learning model is proposed in this study. The revised 
generative stochastic networks (GSN) model with transited by the hidden Markov
chain is used. The data of the training set are collected from clinical
observation. The training set is composed of 83 observations of blood samples
with the genotypes respectively on CYP2D6*2, *10, *14 and CYP1A2*1C, *1 F. The
samples are genotyped by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method. A hidden
Markov chain is used as the transition operator to simulate the probabilistic
distribution. The model can perform learning at lower cost compared to the
conventional maximal likelihood method because the transition distribution is
conditional on the previous state of the hidden Markov chain. A least square loss
(LASSO) algorithm and a k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) algorithm are used as the
baselines for comparison and to evaluate the performance of our proposed deep
learning model.
RESULTS: There are 53 adverse reactions reported during the observation. They are
assigned to 14 categories. In the comparison of classification accuracy, the deep
learning model shows superiority over the LASSO and kNN model with a rate over
80 %. In the comparison of reliability, the deep learning model shows the best
stability among the three models.
CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning provides a new method to explore the complex
associations among genomic variations and multiple events in pharmacogenomics
studies. The new deep learning algorithm is capable of classifying various SNPs
to the corresponding adverse reactions. We expect that as more genomic variations
are added as features and more observations are made, the deep learning model can
improve its performance and can act as a black-box but reliable verifier for
other GWAS studies.


